---
title: Q & A with a Data Scientist
category: General
---
## Conversation with a working data scientist:

As a current student in a data science boot camp, in the weeds of figuring out modeling, OSEMN, coding, and time series, to name a few, I thought it’d be beneficial to ask a few questions about a full-time data scientist’s own particular journey into the field. You can read just about anywhere that data science is an “evolving” field and is one of the most “in demand” positions according to some sources. Bootcamps are now online with an entry barrier being just a computer and time to learn. However, from starting out to signing your work contract at your first data science position it can seem like a daunting task for some. I decided to ask questions to a working data scientist, not only to allay some of my own fears about changing careers and entering tech but also to see how it can be done, as well as any tips or advice. 

My data science interviewee is a full-time data scientist in the financial sector. His current position is “data scientist”. In the hierarchy at his place of employment he stands as such:

Data analyst
** Data scientist
Sr. Data scientist
Lead Data scientist
Principal Data scientist.

He went into data science after working for a while in the transportation industry. He did not love his position in transportation and decided to make a gradual career change. The following will be a Q and A: 

### How did you get into data science?

Interviewee: “My first position in the field was as a data scientist in the transportation industry. Once I got a job in data analytics, it was easier to move within the field. After I had my position posted on my LinkedIn, I was asked to teach data science at a university (8 months). From there I then started teaching online at some online boot camps (6 months each, consecutively) and found I liked the online, remote component of it. I decided I wanted to pursue that even more and wanted to do that full time. So I taught at an online data science boot camp and did that full-time for three years. I’ve since been a data scientist in the finance industry for about a year.”

### What drew you into this field?

Interviewee: “I had a job out of college where I was working as a mechanical engineer. I was working the night shift and found I really did not enjoy that. I was trying to figure out what I wanted to do with my life. At the time, my brother was teaching python and gave me resources to learn. I enjoyed learning python and found it to be like solving puzzles. I remember reading some blog about basketball and this guy was making visualizations using matplotlib. The blog was a tutorial on how to make these visualizations and I was able to follow along and make the visualization on my own. I googled the author at the time and found their job title was data scientist. From there I decided I wanted to pursue that position.”

### You mentioned you’re self-taught. How did you go about that? 

Interviewee: “[I used] Mainly MOOCs. Took some courses through Coursera, and Udacity, [and watched] hundreds of hours of Youtube videos, read some blogs and banged my head against the keyboard. I took some courses on machine learning and read some books on machine learning. I found some of the books to be too advanced. I found that most of the successful learning was from Youtube videos and courses that weren’t too math-heavy.


### As a student, I sometimes have moments of self-doubt. Did you experience this as well?

Interviewee: “I’ve experienced moments of self-doubt. The thing that was beneficial for me was that I was doing this 7-8 years ago and [compared to] now, there are thousands of blogs people are making, and blogs showing what they did on Kaggle. Now it’s a lot easier to compare yourself to other people. Back then, there weren’t many blogs on “Towards Data Science” and “Medium”. I look at those sites now, and I get intimidated. [I did have] self-doubt, but I didn’t compare myself as much as I would now if I were starting out. Besides that, working the night shift at the time was a pretty good motivator to try to figure out something else to do, too.”

### Any advice for current students?

Interviewee: “Changing industries is going to be difficult, a lot more people are trying to get jobs, but try to keep in mind there are also a ton of data scientists positions. One main thing I’ve seen with students is imposter syndrome. Try to compare yourself to where you were six months ago, rather than other people. Try to do this instead of comparing yourself to some blog posts. If someone is already in a boot camp, I would recommend trying to resist jumping into things too quickly. When I started, I barely had python experience and I’d be attempting a Kaggle competition that would take me six weeks. My advice would be to spend a lot of time getting the basics down first.”

### What skills have you found to be vital to your job?

Interviewee: “[I’ve used] A lot of SQL and large databases. Getting good with SQL is important and getting comfortable with Git Version control will be useful in a lot of positions.”

### What do you think are some good traits of a successful data scientist? 

Interviewee: “Someone who is not afraid to learn new things since techniques are always changing. Someone who is patient - the data will not always be readily available and can be hard to get… the whole process will require patience. Curiosity is another one. When you get a new dataset, it doesn’t have to be a new topic you find interesting, but you still need to be curious about it.”

### Is there anything that you wish you would have done differently than you did to get into the field? 

Interviewee: “Boot Camps were in-person and full-time when I started, but if I were getting into the field now, I would have done an online boot camp. It would have been a good opportunity to be given feedback and it may have sped up the process of getting a job.”

This is the end of my interview.
